--- Page 1 ---
Lebesgue: Jurnal Ilmiah Pendidikan Matematika, Matematika dan Statistika                                          p-ISSN 2721-8929 
http://lebesgue.lppmbinabangsa.id/index.php/home 
                         e-ISSN 2721-8937 
Vol. 4, No. 2, Agustus 2023                                                                                                                 DOI Issue: 10.46306/lb.v4i2 
DIJKSTRA ALGORITHM IN DETERMINING THE SHORTEST 
ROUTE FOR DELIVERY SERVICE BY J&T EXPRESS IN BANDUNG

Anie Lusiani1,* Siti Samsiyah Purwaningsih2 Euis Sartika3 
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Politeknik Negeri Bandung 
2,3Department of Commercial Administration, Politeknik Negeri Bandung 
Email: anie.lusiani@polban.ac.id.

The determination of the shortest route can be done using various methods, one of which is the Dijkstra algorithm. 
This algorithm is often used in routing problems with minimum weight in computer networks, communication 
networks and transportation networks. There are several applications of the Djikstra algorithm, namely solving 
the problem of the shortest path of neutrosophy, mapping tourism potential, and developing geographic 
information systems in the health sector. In this research, Dijkstra algorithm will be applied to optimize the 
mileage of the delivery of goods packages. Data and information namely the address, weight and number of 
customer packages carried by a courier in one delivery trip are obtained from the drop point of PT. J&T Express 
in Sarijadi area of Bandung City. Meanwhile, data about mileage is obtained from the Google Maps application. 
All this data is used to construct an initial model graph that is a connected weighted graph, where the location of 
a drop point or a customer is a vertex and a road connecting two locations is an edge on the graph. The weight 
in this graph is the mileage from the drop point to the customers or from one customer to another. Then, the 
Djikstra algorithm is run on this graph where the drop point is the starting point of the route, so that the courier 
visits all customers and returns again to the drop point. The resulting route is a cycle in the graph which is the 
shortest closed route at 1890 meters. 
Keywords: connected weighted graph, Dijkstra algorithm

--- Page 2 ---
DIJKSTRA ALGORITHM IN DETERMINING THE SHORTEST ROUTE FOR DELIVERY SERVICE BY J&T 
EXPRESS IN BANDUNG 
Anie Lusiani, Siti Samsiyah Purwaningsih, Euis Sartika 
Vol. 4, No. 2, Agustus 2023 hal. 940-948 
DOI Artikel: 10.46306/lb.v4i2.337 
INTRODUCTION