This second and third steps result in a vertex always being found, if the vertex is 
connected to a vertex that has been visited (in fact, a vertex is found more than once if the 
vertex is connected to some vertices that have been visited). But not all vertex needs to be 
visited. In the optimization process, if a vertex does not have a minimum weight, then the 
vertex does not need to be visited. Next, we repeat the second and third steps, so that all vertices 
have been visited and the courier returns to the initial vertex (vertex 1). The following figure 
and table show the second and third steps in the first loop on Dijkstra algorithm.

Figure 3 Graph G in The First Loop of Dijkstra Algorithm

Vertex 1 has been determined as the starting point, so in Figure 3, vertex 1 is 
coloured blue to indicate it has been found and visited. The first row in Table 2 shows the 
route from vertex 1 to vertex 1 yields zero weight. In the second step, vertices 2, 3, 4, 5, 8,

--- Page 5 ---
DIJKSTRA ALGORITHM IN DETERMINING THE SHORTEST ROUTE FOR DELIVERY SERVICE BY J&T 
EXPRESS IN BANDUNG 
Anie Lusiani, Siti Samsiyah Purwaningsih, Euis Sartika 
Vol. 4, No. 2, Agustus 2023 hal. 940-948 
DOI Artikel: 10.46306/lb.v4i2.337 
9, 12, and 13 are adjacent to vertex 1. Then, these vertices are coloured by red (see Figure 3 on 
the left). Since {1, 9} is the edge with minimum weight of 60 meters, the next vertex to visit is 
vertex 9. So, vertex 9 is coloured by blue (see Figure 3 on the right). This is also shown in the 
ninth row of Table 2.

Table 2 The Vertices Conditions in The First Loop of Algorithm Dijkstra

not yet found

not yet found

not yet found

not yet found

The next step is to loop sequentially from second step to third step until the all of 
vertex has been visited and the courier returns again to vertex 1 as the starting point. The 
following figure shows the second and third steps in the fourth loop on Dijkstra algorithm.

Figure 4 Graph G in The Fourth Loop of Dijkstra Algorithm

Figure 4 on the left shows vertices 9, 10, and 11 have been found and visited, so 
these vertices are coloured by blue. While, vertex 12 has been found and coloured by red. 
Then, Figure 4 on the right shows vertex 12 has been visited, since vertex 12 is the only 
vertex found by vertex 11, so vertex 12 is coloured by blue.  
Table 3 The Vertices Conditions in The Fourth Loop of Dijkstra Algorithm