The flow of research methodology can be described as follows. First, collecting of 
customer location/address data. Then, processing location data into distance data traveled from 
one location to another. Second, constructing this data as an initial model i.e. a connected 
weighted graph. Third, running the Dijkstra algorithm  on this graph so that the shortest route 
is obtained. This shortest route should visit all customers and return again to the drop point. 
Thus, this route is either a closed path (cycle) or a closed trail (circuit) that is a subgraph of the 
initial model graph.

The initial model graph is constructed from data on the number of customers, customer 
locations, the existence of roads connecting one location to another, road conditions traveled, 
and mileage between locations. The road connecting these locations must be passable by a 
motorcycle. In this model, if there is no road connecting 2 locations directly then there is no 
edge between the 2 locations. Thus, the initial model graph of this algorithm is a connected 
weighted graph, namely G, as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1 The Initial Model Graph G

Vertex 1 is the drop point of PT. J&T Express Sarijadi which is the starting point or the 
initial vertex of the route. Vertex 2 until vertex 13 are customers who will be visited by a 
courier one by one sequentially according to the Dijkstra algorithm. The initial model 
constructed graph is not a complete graph because not all vertices are directly connected to 
other vertices by an edge. It is a graph with 13 vertices and 21 edges.

Figure 2 shows a matrix adjacent of the initial model graph. Matrix elements are 
weights on the edges of the graph. The weight of the edges is the mileage from one location 
to another in meters. The element on the main diagonal of the matrix is zero, since there is

--- Page 4 ---
DIJKSTRA ALGORITHM IN DETERMINING THE SHORTEST ROUTE FOR DELIVERY SERVICE BY J&T 
EXPRESS IN BANDUNG 
Anie Lusiani, Siti Samsiyah Purwaningsih, Euis Sartika 
Vol. 4, No. 2, Agustus 2023 hal. 940-948 
DOI Artikel: 10.46306/lb.v4i2.337 
no distance between the same vertices. This matrix is symmetrical, because the mileage 
from vertex i to vertex j is equal to the mileage from vertex j to vertex i.

Figure 2 Matrix Adjacent of Graph G

The steps of the Dijkstra algorithm work as follows. The first step is to establish a 
starting point with the status of having been found and has been visited. A courier picks up 
packages of goods sent to customers at the Sarijadi drop point, so vertex 1 is the starting point 
of the route. Thus, the status of vertex 1 has been found and visited. The second step is to find 
other vertices that are adjacent to vertex 1. If these vertices have not yet found, then change 
their status to be found. However, if it has been found then only update the weight. The third 
step is to choose a vertex with a minimum weight to visit.