As an application in graph theory, a study has been conducted by Ginting et al. in 2019 
on delivery simulation using the Dijkstra algorithm to solve the problem of traveling salesmen 
(Ginting, Osmond, and Aditsania 2019). Dijkstra algorithm can also be used to determine 
current policies and calculate IRL (inverse reinforcement learning) gradients in considering the 
characteristics of food delivery routes (Liu et al. 2020), determine the fastest path in logistics 
distribution by Bulog in the West Java region (Lusiani, Sartika, Binarto, et al. 2021), and solve 
the shortest path problem with fuzzy arc lengths (Deng et al. 2012). The application of graphs 
as models to a problem is not only in determining the shortest path and the fastest path. A graf 
is also used as a model on traffic congestion problems, such as determining waiting times in 
overcoming congestion at the intersection of Toll-Pasteur Bandung road (Lusiani et al. 2020). 
In this article, we will determine the shortest route for delivery service by PT. J&T Express in 
Bandung using Dijkstra algorithm.

--- Page 3 ---
DIJKSTRA ALGORITHM IN DETERMINING THE SHORTEST ROUTE FOR DELIVERY SERVICE BY J&T 
EXPRESS IN BANDUNG 
Anie Lusiani, Siti Samsiyah Purwaningsih, Euis Sartika 
Vol. 4, No. 2, Agustus 2023 hal. 940-948 
DOI Artikel: 10.46306/lb.v4i2.337

The model to be analyzed is the case of a package delivery service carried out by a 
courier from a drop point of PT. J&T Express which is located at Jl. Sarijadi Raya No. 90, 
Sukarasa, Kec. Sukasari, Bandung City. The number of customers served by a courier is more 
than 15 customers in one delivery trip depending on the density of demand. In this case, we 
will analysis for 17 customers in 12 locations in the Gegerkalong Hilir and Sarijadi areas. 
Meanwhile, data about mileage is obtained from the Google Maps application. All this data is 
used to construct an initial model graph which is a connected weighted graph, where the 
location of the drop point or a customer is a vertex and the road connecting two locations is an 
edge of the graph. The weight in this graph is the distance traveled from the drop point to the 
customers or from one customer to another. We call the distance traveled is the mileage. Then, 
the Djikstra algorithm is run on this graph where the drop point is the starting point of the route, 
such that the courier visits all customers and returns again to the drop point.