Open-domain QA Evaluation on
Retrieval-Augmented Language Models
Another aspect of the choice of granularity lies
in what units should be used in the prompt for
retrieval-augmented language models. For large
language models, retrieval-augmented generation
is achieved by prepending retrieved units to user in-
struction and taking them as the input for language
models. We aim to understand the implications of
using retrieved units of different granularity within
the same computational budget at inference time.
To fairly compare using different granularity in the
--- Page 5 ---

Granularity

Unsupervised Dense Retrievers

Proposition

Proposition

Supervised Dense Retrievers

Proposition

Proposition

Table 3: Passage retrieval performance (Recall@k = 5, 20) on five different open-domain QA datasets when
pre-trained dense retrievers work with the three different granularity from the retrieval corpus. Underline denotes
cases where the training split of the target dataset was included in the training data of the dense retriever.
prompts under the same computation budget, we
set a token length limit for retrieved units.
For this reason, we follow an evaluation setup
where the maximum number of retrieved tokens
is capped at l = 100 or 500, i.e. only the top
l tokens from passage, sentence, or proposition
level retrieval are fed into the language model as
input. We evaluate the percentage of questions for
which the predicted answer exactly matches (EM)
the ground truth. We denote our metric as EM @
l tokens. We use LLaMA-2-7B (Touvron et al.,
2023) in our evaluation. To ensure the model’s out-
put aligns with the format of each dataset, we em-
ploy in-context learning, incorporating four-shot
demonstrations as illustrated in Figure 9.
How Does Granularity Influence
Passage Retrieval?
In this section, we report and discuss how index-
ing the corpus at various granularity influences the
passage retrieval performance. Surprisingly, de-
spite all of the dense retrieval models being trained
on only passage-level documents, all the models
demonstrate on-par or superior performance when
the corpus is indexed at the proposition level. Our
results suggest that indexing the corpus at the finer-
grained units improves the cross-task generaliza-
tion on passage retrieval.

Passage Retrieval Performance
We report our evaluation results in Table 3. We
observe that retrieval by propositions outperforms
retrieval by sentences or passages on most tasks for
both unsupervised and supervised retrievers.
With all dense retrievers tested, proposition-
level retrieval consistently outperforms sentence
and passage-level retrieval on average across the
five datasets. With the unsupervised retrievers, i.e.
SimCSE and Contriever, we see an averaged Re-
call@5 improvement of +12.0 and +9.3 (35.0%
and 22.5% relative improvement) on five datasets.
With the supervised retrievers, proposition-level
retrieval still shows an advantage on average, yet
the sizes of improvements are smaller. We hypothe-
size that this is due to these retrievers being trained
on query-passage pairs. For instance, with DPR,
which have been trained on NQ, TQA, WebQ, and
SQuAD, we observe that proposition and sentence
level retrieval perform slightly worse compared to
passage level on three out of the four datasets, with
the exception of SQuAD. As shown in Table 3, all
supervised retrievers demonstrate comparable per-
formance across three levels of retrieval granularity
in NQ, TQA, and WebQ.
However, on datasets that the retriever model has
not seen during training, we observe that retrieval
by proposition demonstrates a clear advantage. For
instance, most notably on SQuAD or EntityQues-
tions, we observe that proposition-based retrieval
significantly outperforms the other two granulari-
ties. We see 25% Recall@5 relative improvement
on EntityQuestions with relatively weak retrievers
like DPR. Furthermore, the Recall@5 of retrieval
by proposition on SQuAD improved most on GTR,
--- Page 6 ---