--- Page 1 ---
EMNLP 2024 Main Conference
Dense X Retrieval: What Retrieval Granularity Should We Use?
Tong Chen♣* Hongwei Wang♢Sihao Chen♡Wenhao Yu♢
Kaixin Ma♢Xinran Zhao♠Hongming Zhang♢Dong Yu♢
♣University of Washington
♢Tencent AI Lab
♡University of Pennsylvania
♠Carnegie Mellon University

Dense retrieval has become a prominent
method to obtain relevant context or world
knowledge in open-domain NLP tasks. When
we use a learned dense retriever on a retrieval
corpus at inference time, an often-overlooked
design choice is the retrieval unit in which the
corpus is indexed, e.g. document, passage, or
sentence. We discover that the retrieval unit
choice significantly impacts the performance of
both retrieval and downstream tasks. Distinct
from the typical approach of using passages or
sentences, we introduce a novel retrieval unit,
proposition, for dense retrieval. Propositions
are defined as atomic expressions within text,
each encapsulating a distinct factoid and pre-
sented in a concise, self-contained natural lan-
guage format. We conduct an empirical com-
parison of different retrieval granularity. Our
experiments reveal that indexing a corpus by
fine-grained units such as propositions signif-
icantly outperforms passage-level units in re-
trieval tasks. Moreover, constructing prompts
with fine-grained retrieved units for retrieval-
augmented language models improves the per-
formance of downstream QA tasks given a spe-
cific computation budget.
Introduction
Dense retrievers are a popular class of techniques
for accessing external information sources for open-
domain NLP tasks (Karpukhin et al., 2020). Before
we use a learned dense retriever to retrieve from a
corpus, an imperative design decision we have to
make is the retrieval unit – i.e. the granularity at
which we segment and index the retrieval corpus
for inference. In practice, the choice of retrieval
units, e.g. documents, fixed-length passage chunks
or sentences, etc, is usually pre-determined based
* Work was done during internship at Tencent AI Lab,

https://github.com/chentong0/
factoid-wiki
Question: What is the angle of the Tower of Pisa?

Prior to restoration work performed be-
tween 1990 and 2001, the tower leaned at
an angle of 5.5 degrees, but the tower now
leans at about 3.99 degrees. This means
the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa is dis-
placed horizontally 3.9 meters (12 ft 10 in)
from the center.

Prior to restoration work performed be-
tween 1990 and 2001, the tower leaned at
an angle of 5.5 degrees, but the tower now
leans at about 3.99 degrees.
Proposition

The Leaning Tower of Pisa now leans at
about 3.99 degrees.