We conduct experiments on five different open-
domain QA datasets and empirically compare the
performance of four dual-encoder retrievers when
Wikipedia is indexed by passages, sentences, and
our proposed propositions. Notably, our findings in-
dicate that proposition-based retrieval outperforms
sentence and passage-based retrieval, especially in
terms of generalization, as discussed in §5. This
suggests that propositions, being both compact and
rich in context, enable dense retrievers to access
precise information while maintaining adequate
context. The average improvement over passage-
based retrieval of Recall@20 is +10.1 on unsuper-
vised dense retrievers and +2.7 on supervised re-
trievers, even though these retrievers were directly
trained on passage-level retrieval. Furthermore,
we observe a distinct advantage of proposition-
based retrieval in downstream QA performance
when using retrieval-augmented language models,
as elaborated in §6. Retrieval by finer-grained units
inherently provides a higher density of question-
relevant information. This finding implies using
finer-grained units in the prompts achieves the same
performance with a shorter input length, and hence,
a faster inference time. Our main contributions are:
--- Page 3 ---
• We provide a systemic study on how retrieval
granularity impacts retrieval and downstream
task performance. We observe that the retrieval
units have a significant impact on performance. • We introduce FACTOIDWIKI, a processed En-
glish Wikipedia dump, where each page is seg-
mented into multiple granularities: passages, sen-
tences, and our proposed propositions. • We propose retrieval by proposition as an alter-
native strategy, which achieves better retrieval
and QA accuracy and generalization performance
(with unsupervised retriever), compared to pas-
sage or sentence as retrieval unit. Proposition as a Retrieval Unit
The goal of our study is to understand how the gran-
ularity of a retrieval corpus influences the dense
retrieval models’ performance empirically. Aside
from commonly-used retrieval units such as 100-
word passages (Karpukhin et al., 2020) or sen-
tences, we propose using proposition as an alterna-
tive retrieval unit choice. Here, propositions repre-
sent atomic expressions of meanings in text (Min
et al., 2023) with three defining principles below. 1. Each proposition should correspond to a distinct
piece of meaning in text, where the composition
of all propositions would represent the seman-
tics of the entire text. 2. A proposition should be minimal, i.e. it cannot
be further split into separate propositions. 3. A proposition should be contextualized and self-
contained (Choi et al., 2021). A proposition
should include all the necessary context from the
text (e.g.