LLMs-Generated Content. Addressing the limitations of
external auxiliary information in RAG, some research has
focused on exploiting LLMs’ internal knowledge. SKR [58]
classifies questions as known or unknown, applying retrieval
enhancement selectively. GenRead [13] replaces the retriever
with an LLM generator, finding that LLM-generated contexts
often contain more accurate answers due to better alignment
with the pre-training objectives of causal language modeling.
Selfmem [17] iteratively creates an unbounded memory pool
with a retrieval-enhanced generator, using a memory selec-
tor to choose outputs that serve as dual problems to the
original question, thus self-enhancing the generative model.
These methodologies underscore the breadth of innovative
data source utilization in RAG, striving to improve model
performance and task effectiveness.
2) Retrieval Granularity: Another important factor besides
the data format of the retrieval source is the granularity of
the retrieved data. Coarse-grained retrieval units theoretically
can provide more relevant information for the problem, but
they may also contain redundant content, which could distract
the retriever and language models in downstream tasks [50],
[87]. On the other hand, fine-grained retrieval unit granularity
increases the burden of retrieval and does not guarantee seman-
tic integrity and meeting the required knowledge. Choosing

--- Page 8 ---
the appropriate retrieval granularity during inference can be
a simple and effective strategy to improve the retrieval and
downstream task performance of dense retrievers.
In text, retrieval granularity ranges from fine to coarse,
including Token, Phrase, Sentence, Proposition, Chunks, Doc-
ument. Among them, DenseX [30]proposed the concept of
using propositions as retrieval units. Propositions are defined
as atomic expressions in the text, each encapsulating a unique
factual segment and presented in a concise, self-contained nat-
ural language format. This approach aims to enhance retrieval
precision and relevance. On the Knowledge Graph (KG),
retrieval granularity includes Entity, Triplet, and sub-Graph.
The granularity of retrieval can also be adapted to downstream
tasks, such as retrieving Item IDs [40]in recommendation tasks
and Sentence pairs [38]. Detailed information is illustrated in

B. Indexing Optimization
In the Indexing phase, documents will be processed, seg-
mented, and transformed into Embeddings to be stored in a
vector database. The quality of index construction determines
whether the correct context can be obtained in the retrieval