To capture the logical relationship between document
content and structure, KGP [91] proposed a method of building
an index between multiple documents using KG. This KG
consists of nodes (representing paragraphs or structures in the
documents, such as pages and tables) and edges (indicating
semantic/lexical similarity between paragraphs or relationships
within the document structure), effectively addressing knowl-
edge retrieval and reasoning problems in a multi-document
environment. C. Query Optimization
One of the primary challenges with Naive RAG is its
direct reliance on the user’s original query as the basis for
retrieval. Formulating a precise and clear question is difficult,
and imprudent queries result in subpar retrieval effectiveness. Sometimes, the question itself is complex, and the language
is not well-organized. Another difficulty lies in language
complexity ambiguity. Language models often struggle when
dealing with specialized vocabulary or ambiguous abbrevi-
ations with multiple meanings. For instance, they may not
discern whether “LLM” refers to large language model or a
Master of Laws in a legal context. 1) Query Expansion: Expanding a single query into mul-
tiple queries enriches the content of the query, providing
further context to address any lack of specific nuances, thereby
ensuring the optimal relevance of the generated answers. Multi-Query. By employing prompt engineering to expand
queries via LLMs, these queries can then be executed in
parallel. The expansion of queries is not random, but rather
meticulously designed. Sub-Query. The process of sub-question planning represents
the generation of the necessary sub-questions to contextualize
and fully answer the original question when combined. This
process of adding relevant context is, in principle, similar
to query expansion. Specifically, a complex question can be
decomposed into a series of simpler sub-questions using the
least-to-most prompting method [92]. Chain-of-Verification(CoVe). The expanded queries undergo
validation by LLM to achieve the effect of reducing halluci-
nations. Validated expanded queries typically exhibit higher
reliability [93].